Hi everyone, hope you're well and next up what I'd like to do is I'd like to build out make more
Like micrograd before it make more is a repository that I have on my github web page
You can look at it, but just like with micrograd
I'm going to build it out step by step and I'm going to spell everything out
So we're going to build it out slowly and together
Now what is make more?
Make more as the name suggests makes more of things that you give it
So here's an example names.txt is an example data set to make more and
When you look at names.txt you'll find that it's a very large data set of names
so
Here's lots of different types of names
in fact
I believe there are 32,000 names that I've sort of found randomly on the government website and
If you train make more on this data set it will learn to make more of things like this
And in particular in this case that will mean more things that sound name like but are actually unique names
And maybe if you have a baby and you're trying to assign name
Maybe you're looking for a cool new sounding unique name make more might help you
So here are some example generations from the neural network once we train it on our data set
So here's some example unique names that it will generate don't tell
I rot
Zendy and so on and so all these are sound name like but they're not of course names
So under the hood make more is a character level language model
So what that means is that is treating every single line here as an example and within each example
It's treating them all as sequences of individual characters
So R E E S E is this example and that's the sequence of characters
And that's the level on which we are building out make more and what it means to be a character level language model
Then is that it's just sort of modeling those sequences of characters and it knows how to predict the next character in the sequence
Now we're actually going to implement a large number of
Character level language models in terms of the neural networks that are involved in predicting the next character in a sequence
So very simple by Graham and back of word models
Multilevel perceptrons recurrent neural networks all the way to modern
Transformers in fact a transformer that we will build will be basically the equivalent transformer to GPT2 if you have heard of GPT
So that's kind of a big deal
It's a modern network and by the end of the series you will actually understand how that works
On the level of characters now to give you a sense of the extensions here
After characters we will probably spend some time on the word level so that we can generate documents of words not just little you know segments of characters
But we can generate entire large much larger documents
And then we're probably going to go into images and image text
Networks such as Dali stable diffusion and so on but for now we have to start
Here character level language modeling. Let's go
So like before we are starting with a completely blank GPTN notebook page
The first thing is I would like to basically load up the data set names.txt
So we're going to open up names.txt for reading and
We're going to read in everything into a massive string and
Then because it's a massive string we'd only like the individual words and put them in the list
So let's call split lines on that string to get all of our words as a Python list of strings
so basically we can look at for example the first 10 words and
We have that it's a list of Emma Olivia Eva and so on and if we look at
The top of the page here that is indeed what we see
um
So that's good
This list actually makes me feel that
This is probably sorted by frequency
But okay, so these are the words now we'd like to actually like learn a little bit more about this data set
Let's look at the total number of words. We expect this to be roughly 32 000
And then what is the for example shortest word?
so min of
line of each word for w in words
So the shortest word will be length
two
And max of land w for w in words. So the longest word will be
15 characters
So let's now think through our very first language model
As I mentioned a character level language model is predicting the next character in a sequence given
Already some concrete sequence of characters before it
Now what we have to realize here is that every single word here like Isabella
Is actually quite a few examples packed in to that single word
Because what is a an existence of a word like Isabella in the data set telling us really it's saying that
The character i is a very likely character to come first
in a sequence of a name
The character s is likely to come
after i
The character a is likely to come after is
The character b is very likely to come after isa and someone all the way to a following Isabella
And then there's one more example actually packed in here and that is that
After there's Isabella
The word is very likely to end
So that's one more sort of explicit piece of information that we have here that we have to be careful with
And so there's a lot packed into a single individual word in terms of the
Statistical structure of what's likely to follow in these character sequences
And then of course we don't have just an individual word. We actually have 32 000 of these and so there's a lot of structure here to model
Now in beginning what I'd like to start with is I'd like to start with building a bi-gram language model
Now in a bi-gram language model, we're always working with just two characters at a time
So we're only looking at one character that we are given and we're trying to predict the next character in the sequence
so
What characters are likely to follow are what characters are likely to follow a and so on and we're just modeling that kind of a little
local structure
And we're forgetting the fact that we may have a lot more information
We're always just looking at the previous character to predict the next one
So it's a very simple and weak language model, but I think it's a great place to start
So now let's begin by looking at these bi-grams in our data set and what they look like and these bi-grams again are just two characters in a row
so for w in words
each w here is an individual word a string
we want to iterate uh for
We want to iterate this word
with consecutive characters
So two characters at a time sliding it through the word
Now a interesting nice way cute way to do this in python, by the way
Is doing something like this for character one character two in zip of
w and w at one
one column
print
character one character two
And let's not do all the words
Let's just do the first three words and i'm going to show you in a second how this works
But for now basically as an example, let's just do the very first word alone emma
You see how we have a emma and this will just print em, mm, ma
And the reason this works is because w is the string emma w at one column is the string mma
And zip takes two iterators and it pairs them up
And then creates an iterator over the tuples of their consecutive entries
And if any one of these lists is shorter than the other then it will just uh halt and return
So basically, that's why we return em, mm, mm, ma
But then because this iterator second one here runs out of elements zip just ends and that's why we only get these tuples
So pretty cute
So these are the consecutive elements in the first word
Now we have to be careful because we actually have more information here than just these three
Examples as I mentioned we know that e is the is very likely to come first and we know that a in this case is coming last
So one way to do this is basically we're going to create
special array here
characters
And um, we're going to hallucinate a special start token here
I'm going to
call it like special start
So this is a list of one element
plus
w
And then plus a special end character
And the reason i'm wrapping the list of w here is because w is a string mma
List of w will just have the individual characters in the list
And then doing this again now, but not iterating over w's but over the characters
Will give us something like this
So e is likely so this is a bygram of the start character and e and this is a bygram of the
a and the special end character
And now we can look at for example what this looks like for
olivia or heva
And indeed we can actually
Potentially do this for the entire data set, but we won't print that that's going to be too much
But these are the individual character bygrams and we can print them
Now in order to learn the statistics about which characters are likely to follow other characters
The simplest way in the bygram language models is to simply do it by counting
So we're basically just going to count how often any one of these combinations occurs in the training set
In these words
So we're going to need some kind of a dictionary that's going to maintain some counts for every one of these bygrams
So let's use a dictionary b
And this will map these bygrams
So bygram is a tuple of character one character two
And then b at bygram
Will be b dot get of bygram
Which is basically the same as b at bygram
But in the case that bygram is not in the dictionary b. We would like to by default return a zero
Plus one
So this will basically add up all the bygrams and count how often they occur
Let's get rid of printing
or rather
Let's keep the printing and let's just inspect what b is in this case
And we see that many bygrams occur just a single time this one allegedly occurred three times
So a was an ending character three times
And that's true for all of these words all of emma olivia and eva and with a
Uh, so that's why this occurred three times
Um now let's do it for all the words
Oops, I should not have printed
I meant to erase that
Let's kill this
Let's just run
And now b will have the statistics of the entire data set
So these are the counts across all the words of the individual bygrams
And we could for example look at some of the most common ones and least common ones
Um, this kind of grows in python
But the way to do this the simplest way I like is we just use b dot items
b dot items returns
the tuples of
Key value in this case the keys are the character bygrams and the values are the counts
And so then what we want to do is we want to do um
Sort it of this
But by default sort is on the first
um
On the first item of a tuple
But we want to sort by the values which are the second element of a tuple that is the key value
So we want to use the key
equals lambda
That takes the key value
And returns the key value at the one not at zero but at one which is the count
So we want to sort by the count
Of these elements
And actually we want it to go backwards
So here what we have is the bygram q and r occurs only a single time
dz occurred only a single time and when we sort this the other way around
We're going to see the most likely bygrams
So we see that n was very often an ending character many many times and apparently n almost always follows an a
And that's a very likely combination as well
Um
So
This is kind of the individual counts that we achieve over the entire data set
Now it's actually going to be significantly more convenient for us to
Keep this information in a two-dimensional array instead of a python dictionary
so we're going to store this information in a 2d array and
The rows are going to be the first character of the bygram and the columns are going to be the second character
And each entry in the two-dimensional array will tell us how often that first character follows the second character in the data set
So in particular the array representation that we're going to use or the library is that of pytorch
And pytorch is a deep learning neural network framework
But part of it is also this torch dot tensor, uh, which allows us to create multi-dimensional arrays and manipulate them very efficiently
So let's import pytorch, which you can do by import torch
And then we can create arrays
So let's create an array of zeros
And we give it a um size of this array. Let's create a three by five array as an example
and
This is a three by five array of zeros
And by default you'll notice a dot d type, which is short for data type is float 32
So these are single precision floating point numbers
Because we are going to represent counts. Let's actually use d type as torch dot in 32
So these are
32 bit integers
So now you see that we have integer data inside this tensor
Now tensors allow us to really, um
Manipulate all the individual entries and do it very efficiently
So for example, if we want to change this bit
We have to index into the tensor and in particular here
This is the first row and the
Um, because it's zero indexed. So this is row index one and column index zero one two three
So a at one comma three we can set that to one
And then a we'll have a one over there
We can of course also do things like this. So now a will be two over there
Or three
And also we can for example say a zero zero is five
And then a we'll have a five over here
So that's how we can index into the arrays
Now, of course the array that we are interested in is much much bigger
So for our purposes, we have 26 letters of the alphabet
And then we have two special characters s and e
So, uh, we want 26 plus two or 28 by 28 array
And let's call it the capital n because it's going to represent sort of the counts
Let me erase this stuff
So that's the array that starts at zeros 28 by 28
And now let's copy paste this
Here but instead of having a dictionary b
Which we're going to erase we now have an n
Now the problem here is that we have these characters which are strings, but we have to now
basically index into a
Array and we have to index using integers. So we need some kind of a lookup table from characters to integers
So let's construct such a character array
And the way we're going to do this is we're going to take all the words which is a list of strings
We're going to concatenate all of it into a massive string. So this is just simply the entire dataset as a single string
We're going to pass this to the set constructor which takes this massive string
And throws out duplicates because sets do not allow duplicates
So set of this will just be the set of all the lowercase characters
And there should be a total of 26 of them
And now we actually don't want a set we want a list
But we don't want a list sorted in some weird arbitrary way. We want it to be sorted
from a to z
So sorted list
So those are our characters
Now what we want is this lookup table as I mentioned. So let's create a special s2i. I will call it
s is string or character and this will be an s2i mapping
for
Is in enumerate of these characters
So enumerate basically gives us this iterator over the integer
index and the actual element of the list and then we are mapping the character to the integer
So s2i
Is a mapping from a to 0 b to 1 etc all the way from z to 25
And that's going to be useful here, but we actually also have to specifically set that s will be 26
And s2i at e
Will be 27 right because z was 25
So those are the lookups and now we can come here and we can map
Both character 1 and character 2 to their integers
So this will be s2i character 1
And ix2 will be s2i of character 2
And now we should be able to
Do this line, but using our array. So n at ix1 ix2
This is the two-dimensional array indexing. I've shown you before and honestly just plus equals 1
Because everything starts at zero
So this should work
And give us a large 28 by 28 array
Of all these counts. So if we print n
This is the array, but of course it looks ugly
So let's erase this ugly mess and let's try to visualize it a bit more nicer
So for that we're going to use a library called mathplotlib
So mathplotlib allows us to create figures. So we can do things like pltim show of the count array
So this is the 20 by 28 array
And this is a structure, but even this I would say is still pretty ugly
So we're going to try to create a much nicer visualization of it and I wrote a bunch of code for that
The first thing we're going to need is
We're going to need to invert
This array here this dictionary. So s2i is a mapping from s to i
And in i2s, we're going to reverse this dictionary
So it rid of all the items and just reverse that array
So i2s maps inversely from 0 to a 1 to b etc
So we'll need that
And then here's the code that I came up with to try to make this a little bit nicer
To create a figure
We plot n
And then we do and then we visualize a bunch of things later. Let me just run it so you get a sense of what this is
Okay, so you see here that we have
the array spaced out
And every one of these is basically like b follows g zero times
b follows h 41 times
So a follows j 175 times
And so what you can see that i'm doing here is first i show that entire array
And then I iterate over all the individual little cells here
And I create a character string here
Which is the inverse mapping i2s of the integer i and the integer j
So those are the bigrams in a character representation
And then I plot just the bigram text and then I plot the number of times that this bigram occurs
Now the reason that there's a dot item here is because when you index into these arrays, these are torch tensors
You see that we still get a tensor back
So the type of this thing you think it would be just an integer 149, but it's actually a torch dot tensor
And so if you do dot item, then it will pop out that individual integer
So it will just be 149
So that's what's happening there. And these are just some options to make it look nice
So what is the structure of this array?
We have all these counts and we see that some of them occur often and some of them do not occur often
Now if you scrutinize this carefully, you will notice that we're not actually being very clever
That's because when you come over here
You'll notice that for example, we have an entire row of completely zeros
And that's because the end character
Is never possibly going to be the first character of a bigram because we're always placing these end tokens all at the end of a bigram
Similarly, we have entire column zeros here because the s
Character will never possibly be the second element of a bigram because we always start with s and we end with e and we only have the words in between
So we have an entire column of zeros an entire row of zeros
And in this little two by two matrix here as well
The only one that can possibly happen is if s directly follows e
That can be non-zero if we have a word that has no letters
So in that case, there's no letters in the word. It's an empty word and we just have s follows e
But the other ones are just not possible
And so we're basically wasting space and not only that but the s and the e are getting very crowded here
I was using these brackets because there's convention and natural language processing to use these kinds of brackets to denote special
tokens
But we're going to use something else
So let's fix all this and make it prettier
We're not actually going to have two special tokens. We're only going to have one special token
So we're going to have n by n array of 27 by set 27 instead
Instead of having two we will just have one and I will call it a dot
Okay
Let me swing this over here
Now one more thing that I would like to do is I would actually like to make this special character half position zero
And I would like to offset all the other letters off. I find that a little bit more pleasing
um, so
We need a plus one here so that the first character which is a will start at one
So s to i will now be a starts at one and dot is zero
And uh i2s, of course, we're not changing this because i2s just creates a reverse mapping and this will work fine
So one is a two is b zero is dot
So we've reversed that here
We have a dot and a dot
This should work fine make sure I started zeros
Count and then here we don't go up to 28 we go up to 27 and this should just work
Okay, so we see that dot dot never happened. It's at zero because we don't have empty words
Then this row here now is just very simply the
Counts for all the first letters. So
G j starts a word h starts a word i starts a word etc
And then these are all the ending
characters
And in between we have the structure of what characters follow each other
So this is the counts array of our entire
Uh dataset
So this array actually has all of the information necessary for us to actually sample from this bigram
character level language model
and
Roughly speaking what we're going to do is we're just going to start following these probabilities and these counts
And we're going to start sampling from the from model
So in the beginning, of course, um, we start with the dot the start token
Dot so to sample the first character of a name. We're looking at this row here
So we see that we have the counts and those counts externally are telling us how often any one of these characters is to start a word
So if we take this n and we grab the first row
We can do that by
using just indexing a zero and then using this notation column for the rest of that row
so n zero column
Is indexing into the zero?
Row and then it's grabbing all the columns
And so this will give us a one-dimensional array
Of the first row. So zero four four ten
You know zero four four ten one three oh six one five four two
Etc. Just the first row the shape of this is
27 it's just the row of 27
And the other way that you can do this also is you just you don't actually give this
You just grab the zero row like this. This is equal
Now these are the counts
And now what we'd like to do is we'd like to basically um sample from this
Since these are the raw counts, we actually have to convert this to probabilities
So we create a probability vector
So we'll take n of zero
And we'll actually convert this to float
first
Okay, so these integers are converted to float
floating point numbers and the reason we're creating floats is because we're about to normalize these counts
So to create a probability distribution here, we want to divide
We basically want to do p p p divide p that sum
And now we get a vector of smaller numbers and these are now probabilities
So of course because we divided by the sum the sum of p now is one
So this is a nice proper probability distribution
It sums to one and this is giving us the probability for any single character to be the first
character of a word
So now we can try to sample from this distribution to sample from these distributions
We're going to use torsion multinomial, which I've pulled up here
So torsion multinomial returns a
Samples from the multinomial probability distribution, which is a complicated way of saying you give me probabilities
And I will give you integers which are sampled
According to the probability distribution
So this is the signature of the method and to make everything deterministic
We're going to use a generator object in pi torch
So this makes everything deterministic so when you run this on your computer
You're going to the exact get the exact same results that i'm getting here on my computer
So let me show you how this works
Here's the deterministic way of creating a torch generator object
Seeding it with some number that we can agree on
So that seeds a generator gets gives us an object g
And then we can pass that g to a function that creates
Here random numbers torch.rand creates random numbers three of them
And it's using this generator object to as a source of randomness
So
Without normalizing it
I can just print
This is sort of like numbers between zero and one that are random according to this thing and whenever I run it again
I'm always going to get the same result because I keep using the same generator object, which i'm seeding here
And then if I divide
To normalize i'm going to get a nice probability distribution of just three elements
And then we can use torsion multinomial to draw samples from it. So this is what that looks like
Torsion multinomial will take the torch tensor
of probability distributions
Then we can ask for a number of samples like say 20
Replacement equals true means that when we draw an element
We will we can draw it and then we can put it back into the list of eligible indices to draw again
And we have to specify replacement as true because by default for some reason it's false
And I think
You know, it's just something to be careful with
And the generator is passed in here. So we are going to always get deterministic results the same results
So if I run these two
We're going to get a bunch of samples from this distribution
Now you'll notice here that the probability for the first element in this tensor is 60
So in these 20 samples, we'd expect 60 of them to be zero
We'd expect 30 percent of them to be one
And because the the element index two
Has only 10 probability
Very few of these samples should be two and indeed we only have a small number of twos
And we can sample as many as we like
And the more we sample the more
These numbers should roughly have the distribution here
So we should have lots of zeros half as many
Once and we should have
three times s few
Oh, sorry s few ones and three times s few
twos
So you see that we have very few twos. We have some ones and most of them are zero
So that's what torsion multinomial is doing
for us here
We are interested in this row. We've created this
P here and now we can sample from it
So if we use the same seed
And then we sample from this distribution, let's just get one sample
Then we see that the sample is say 13
So this will be the index
And let's you see how it's a tensor that wraps 13
We again have to use dot item to pop out that integer
And now index would be just the number 13
And of course the um, we can do we can map the i2s of ix to figure out exactly which character
We're sampling here. We're sampling m
So we're saying that the first character is m in our generation
And just looking at the row here
m was drawn and you we can see that m actually starts a large number of words
m started 2,500 words out of 32,000 words. So almost
A bit less than 10 of the words start with m. So this is actually fairly likely character to draw
So that would be the first character of our word and now we can continue to sample more characters
Because now we know that m started
m is already sampled
So now to draw the next character, we will come back here and we will look for the row
That starts with m. So you see m
And we have a row here
so we see that m dot is
516 ma is this many mb is this many etc
So these are the counts for the next row and that's the next character that we are going to now generate
So I think we are ready to actually just write out the loop because I think you're starting to get a sense of how this is going to go
The um
We always begin at index zero because that's the start token
And then while true
We're going to grab the row corresponding to index
That we're currently on so that's p
So that's n array at ix
converted to float is rp
Then we normalize the speed to sum to one
I accidentally ran the infinite loop
We normalize p to sum to one
Then we need this generator object
And we're going to initialize up here and we're going to draw a single sample from this distribution
And then this is going to tell us what index is going to be next
If the index sampled is zero, then that's now the nth token
So we will break
Otherwise we are going to print s2i of ix
i2s of ix
And uh, that's pretty much it. We're just uh, this should work
Okay more
So that's the that's the name that we've sampled we started with m the next step was o then r and then dot
And this dot we printed here as well
so
Let's now do this a few times
um
So let's actually create an
Out list here
And instead of printing we're going to append so out that append this character
And then here let's just print it at the end. So let's just join up all the outs and we're just going to print more
Okay, now we're always getting the same result because of the generator
So if we want to do this a few times we can go for high and range
10 we can sample 10 names
And we can just do that 10 times
And these are the names that we're getting out
Let's do 20
I'll be honest with you, this doesn't look right
So I started a few minutes to convince myself that it actually is right
The reason these samples are so terrible is that by gram language model is actually looks just like really terrible
We can generate a few more here
And you can see that they're kind of like their name like a little bit like keanu iraily etc
But they're just like totally messed up
And I mean the reason that this is so bad like we're generating h as a name
But you have to think through it from the model's eyes
It doesn't know that this h is the very first h. All it knows is that h was previously
And now how likely is h the last character?
Well, it's somewhat likely and so it just makes it last character
It doesn't know that there were other things before it or there were not other things before it
And so that's why it's generating all these like nonsense names
in other ways to do this is
To convince yourself that this is actually doing something reasonable even though it's so terrible
is
These little p's here are 27 right like 27
So how about if we did something like this?
Instead of p having any structure whatsoever
How about if p was just a torch dot ones?
Of 27
By default, this is a float 32. So this is fine divide 27
So what I'm doing here is this is the uniform distribution, which will make everything equally likely
And we can sample from that. So let's see if that does any better
Okay, so it's this is what you have from a model that is completely untrained where everything is equally likely
So it's obviously garbage and then if we have a trained model, which is trained on just by grams
This is what we get. So you can see that it is more name like it is actually working. It's just
By gram is so terrible and we have to do better
Now next I would like to fix an inefficiency that we have going on here
Because what we're doing here is we're always fetching a row of n from the counts matrix up ahead
And then we're always doing the same things
We're converting to float and we're dividing and we're doing this every single iteration of this loop
And we just keep renormalizing these rows over and over again and it's extremely inefficient and wasteful
So what I'd like to do is I'd like to actually prepare a matrix capital p
That will just have the probabilities in it
So in other words is going to be the same as the capital n matrix here of counts
But every single row will have the row of probabilities
That is normalized to 1 indicating the probability distribution for the next character
Given the character before it
As defined by which row we're in
So basically what we'd like to do is we'd like to just do it up front here
And then we would like to just use that row here
So here we would like to just do p equals p of ix instead
okay
The other reason I want to do this is not just for efficiency
But also I would like us to practice these n-dimensional tensors
And I'd like us to practice their manipulation and especially something that's called broadcasting that we'll go into in a second
We're actually going to have to become very good at these tensor manipulations
Because if we're going to build out all the way to transformers, we're going to be doing some pretty complicated
array operations for efficiency, and we need to really understand that and be very good at it
So intuitively what we want to do is we first want to grab the floating point
copy of n
And I'm mimicking the line here basically
And then we want to divide all the rows so that they sum to 1
So we'd like to do something like this p divide p dot sum
But now we have to be careful because p dot sum actually
produces a sum
Sorry p equals n dot float copy p dot sum produces a
Summs up all of the counts of this entire matrix n
And gives us a single number of just the summation of everything
So that's not the way we want to divide we want to simultaneously and in parallel divide all the rows
by their respective sums
So what we have to do now is we have to go into documentation for torch dot sum
And we can scroll down here to a definition that is relevant to us
Which is where we don't only provide an input array that we want to sum
But we also provide the dimension along which we want to sum
And in particular we want to sum up
Over rows, right
Now one more argument that I want you to pay attention to here is the keep them is false
If keep them is true
Then the output tensor is of the same size as input except of course the dimension along which you summed
Which will become just one
But if you pass in keep them as false
Then this dimension is squeezed out
And so torch dot sum not only does the sum and collapses dimension to be of size one
But in addition it does what's called a squeeze where it squeezes out it squeezes out that dimension
So basically what we want here is we instead want to do p dot sum of sum axis
And in particular notice that p dot shape is 27 by 27
So when we sum up across axis zero, then we would be taking the zero dimension and we would be summing across it
So when keep them is true
Then this thing will not only give us the counts across
um
along the columns
But notice that basically the shape of this is one by 27. We just get a row vector
And the reason we get a row vector here again is because we pass in zero dimension
So this zero dimension becomes one and we've done a sum
And we get a row and so basically we've done the sum
this way
Vertically and arrived at just a single one by 27
vector of counts
What happens when you take out keep them
Is that we just get 27 so it squeezes out that dimension and we just get a one dimensional vector of size 27
Now we don't actually want
One by 27 row vector because that gives us the counts or the sums across
the columns
We actually want to sum the other way along dimension one
And you'll see that the shape of this is 27 by one. So it's a column vector
It's a 27 by one
vector of counts
Okay, and that's because what's happened here is that we're going horizontally and this 27 by 27 matrix becomes a
27 by one array
Now you'll notice by the way that um
the actual numbers
Of these counts are identical
And that's because this special array of counts here comes from bi-gram statistics
And actually it just so happens by chance
Or because of the way this array is constructed that this sums along the columns or along the rows
Horizontally or vertically is identical
But actually what we want to do in this case is we want to sum across the uh rows
horizontally
So what we want here is speed at some of one would keep them true
27 by one column vector and now what we want to do is we want to divide by that
Now we have to be careful here again. Is it possible to take
What's a um p dot shape you see here is 27 by 27?
Is it possible to take a 27 by 27 array and divide it by what is a 27 by one array?
Is that an operation that you can do?
And whether or not you can perform this operation is determined by what's called broadcasting rules
So if you just search broadcasting semantics in torch
You'll notice that there's a special definition for what's called broadcasting that uh for whether or not
these two
Arrays can be combined in a binary operation like division
So the first condition is each tensor has at least one dimension, which is the case for us
And then when iterating over the dimension sizes starting at the trailing dimension
The dimension sizes must either be equal one of them is one or one of them does not exist
Okay, so let's do that. We need to align the two arrays and their shapes
Which is very easy because both of these shapes have two elements. So they're aligned
Then we iterate over from the from the right and going to the left
Each dimension must be either equal one of them is a one or one of them does not exist
So in this case, they're not equal, but one of them is a one. So this is fine
And then this dimension they're both equal. So this is fine
So all the dimensions are fine and therefore the this operation is broadcastable
So that means that this operation is allowed
And what is it that these arrays do when you divide 27 by 27 by 27 by 1?
What it does is that it takes this dimension one and it stretches it out it copies it
to match
27 here in this case
So in our case it takes this column vector, which is 27 by 1 and it copies it 27 times
to make
These both be 27 by 27 internally you can think of it that way and so it copies those counts
And then it does an element wise division
Which is what we want because these counts we want to divide by them on every single one of these columns in this matrix
So this actually we expect will normalize
every single row
And we can check that this is true by taking the first row for example and taking it some
We expect this to be one
Because it's now normalized
And then we expect this now
Because if we actually correctly normalize all the rows we expect to get the exact same result here. So let's run this
It's the exact same result
So this is correct. So now I would like to scare you a little bit
You actually have to like I basically encourage you very strongly to read through broadcasting semantics
And I encourage you to treat this with respect and it's not something to play
Fast and loose with it's something to really respect really understand and look up
Maybe some tutorials for broadcasting and practice it and be careful with it because you can very quickly run it to box
Let me show you what I mean
You see how here we have p. That's some of one keep them this true
The shape of this is 27 by 1
Let me take out this line just so we have the n and then we can see the counts
We can see that this is a all the counts across all the
rows
And it's a 27 by 1 column vector, right?
Now suppose that I tried to do the following but I erase keep them this true here
What does that do if keep them is not true? It's false
Then remember according to documentation it gets rid of this dimension one. It squeezes it out
So basically we just get all the same counts the same result
Except the shape of it is not 27 by 1. It is just 27 the one disappears
But all the counts are the same
So you'd think that this divide that
would uh would work
First of all, can we even uh write this and will it is it even is it even expected to run? Is it broadcastable?
Let's determine if this result is broadcastable
p dot summit one is shape
Is 27 this is 27 by 27 so 27 by 27
Broadcasting into 27
so now
rules of broadcasting number one align all the dimensions on the right done
Now iteration over all the dimensions starting from the right going to the left
All the dimensions must either be equal
One of them must be one or one of them does not exist. So here they are all equal
Here the dimension does not exist
So internally what broadcasting will do is it will create a one here
and then
We see that one of them is a one and this will get copied and this will run this will broadcast
Okay, so you'd expect this to work
Because we we are um
um
This broadcasts and this we can divide this now if I run this you'd expect it to work but
It doesn't
Uh, you actually get garbage you get a wrong result because this is actually a bug
This keep them for equals true
Makes it work
This is a bug
In both cases we are doing the correct counts. We are summing up across the rows
But keep them is saving us and making it work. So in this case
I'd like you to encourage you to potentially like pause this video at this point and try to think about why this is buggy
And why the keep them was necessary here
Okay
So the reason to do for this is I'm trying to hint it here when I was sort of giving you a bit of a hint on how this works
this 27 vector
Internally inside the broadcasting
This becomes a one by 27
And one by 27 is a row vector, right?
And now we are dividing 27 by 27 by 1 by 27
And torch will replicate this dimension. So basically, uh, it will take
It will take this, uh row vector and it will copy it vertically now
27 times so the 27 by 27 lines exactly an element wise divides
And so basically what's happening here is um
We're actually normalizing the columns instead of normalizing the rows
So you can check that what's happening here is that p at zero, which is the first row of p that sum
Is not one it's seven
It is the first column as an example that sums to one
So to summarize where does the issue come from the issue comes from the silent adding of a dimension here
Because in broadcasting rules you align on the right and go from right to left and if dimension doesn't exist you create it
So that's where the problem happens
We still did the counts correctly
We did the counts across the rows and we got the the counts on the right here as a column vector
But because the keep things was true this this uh, this dimension was discarded and now we just have a vector of 27
And because of broadcasting the way it works this vector of 27 suddenly becomes a row vector
And then this row vector gets replicated
Vertically and at every single point we are dividing by the by the count
Uh in the opposite direction
So, uh, so this thing just uh, doesn't work. You this needs to be keep them's equals true in this case
so then
Uh, then we have that p at zero is normalized
And conversely the first column you'd expect to potentially not be normalized
And this is what makes it work
So pretty subtle and uh, hopefully this helps to scare you that you should
Have a respect for broadcasting be careful. Check your work
And uh, understand how it works under the hood and make sure that it's broadcasting in the direction that you like
Otherwise, you're going to introduce very subtle bugs very hard to find bugs and uh, just be careful one more note to an efficiency
We don't want to be doing this here because uh, this creates a completely new tensor that we store into p
We prefer to use in place operations if possible
So this would be an in-place operation has the potential to be faster
It doesn't create new memory under the hood and then let's erase this
We don't need it
and let's also
Um, just do fewer just so i'm not wasting space
Okay, so we're actually in a pretty good spot now
We trained a bi-gram language model and we trained it really just by counting
Uh, how frequently any pairing occurs and then normalizing so that we get a nice probability
So really these elements of this array p
Are really the parameters of our bi-gram language model giving us and summarizing the statistics of these bi-grams
So we trained a model and then we know how to sample from a model. We just iteratively
Sampled the next character and uh feed it in each time and get a next character
Now what i'd like to do is i'd like to somehow evaluate the quality of this model
We'd like to somehow summarize the quality of this model into a single number. How good is it at predicting?
the training set
And as an example so in the training set we can evaluate now the training
Loss and this training loss is telling us about
Sort of the quality of this model in a single number just like we saw in micrograd
So let's try to think through the quality of the model and how we would evaluate it
Basically what we're going to do is we're going to copy paste this code
That we previously used for counting
Okay
And let me just print these bi-grams first. We're going to use f strings
And i'm going to print character one followed by character two. These are the bi-grams
And then I don't want to do it for all the words. Let's just do first three words
So here we have emma olivia and ava bi-grams
Now what we'd like to do is we'd like to basically look at the probability that the model assigns to every one of these bi-grams
So in other words, we can look at the probability, which is
summarized in the matrix p
of ix1, ix2
And then we can print it here as probability
And because these probabilities are way too large, let me percent
our column 0.4f
to like truncate it a bit
So what do we have here, right? We're looking at the probabilities that the model assigns to every one of these bi-grams in the data set
And so we can see some of them are four percent, three percent, etc
Just to have a measuring stick in our mind, by the way
We have 27 possible characters or tokens and if everything was equally likely, then you'd expect all these probabilities
to be
four percent roughly
So anything above four percent means that we've learned something useful from these bi-gram statistics
And you see that roughly some of these are four percent, but some of them are as high as 40 percent
35 percent and so on
So you see that the model actually assigned a pretty high probability to whatever's in the training set and so that that's a good thing
Um, basically if you have a very good model
You'd expect that these probabilities should be near one because that means that uh, your model is correctly predicting
What's going to come next especially on the training set where you where you train your model
So now we'd like to think about how can we summarize these probabilities into a single number that measures the quality of this model
Now when you look at the literature into maximum likelihood estimation and statistical modeling and so on
You'll see that what's typically used here is something called the likelihood
And the likelihood is the product of all of these probabilities
And so the product of all of these probabilities is the likelihood
And it's really telling us about the probability of the entire data set assigned
Assigned by the model that we've trained and that is a measure of quality
So the product of these should be as high as possible
When you are training the model and when you have a good model your product your product of these probabilities should be very high
um
Now because the product of these probabilities is an unwieldy thing to work with
You can see that all of them are between zero and one. So your product of these probabilities will be a very tiny number
um
So for convenience what people work with usually is not the likelihood, but they work with what's called the log likelihood
So
The product of these is the likelihood to get the log likelihood
We just have to take the log of the probability
And so the log of the probability here. I have the log of x from zero to one
The log is a you see here monotonic transformation of the probability
Where if you pass in one
You get zero
So probability one gets your log probability of zero
And then as you go lower and lower probability
The log will grow more and more negative until all the way to negative infinity at zero
So here we have a log prob, which is really just a torche dot log of probability
Let's print it out to get a sense of what that looks like
log prob
also 0.4 f
Okay
So as you can see when we plug in numbers that are very close some of our higher numbers
We get closer and closer to zero and then if we plug in very bad probabilities, we get more and more negative number. That's bad
so
And the reason we work with this is for large extent convenience, right?
Because we have mathematically that if you have some product a times b times c of all these probabilities, right?
The likelihood is the product of all these probabilities
then the log
Of these is just log of a plus
log of b
Plus log of c if you remember your logs from your
High school or undergrad and so on
so we have that basically
The likelihood is the product of probabilities. The log likelihood is just the sum of the logs of the individual probabilities
so
log likelihood
Starts at zero
And then log likelihood here we can just accumulate simply
And then the end we can print this
Print the log likelihood
F strings
Maybe you're familiar with this
So log likelihood is negative 38
Okay
now
We actually want um
So how high can log likelihood get it can go to zero
So when all the probabilities are one log likelihood will be zero and then when all the probabilities are lower
This will grow more and more negative
Now we don't actually like this because what we'd like is a loss function and a loss function has the semantics that low
Is good because we're trying to minimize the loss
So we actually need to invert this and that's what gives us something called the negative log likelihood
um
Negative log likelihood is just negative of the log likelihood
These are f strings by the way if you'd like to look this up negative log likelihood equals
So negative log likelihood now is just negative of it
and so the negative log likelihood is a very nice loss function because
The lowest it can get is zero
And the higher it is the worse off the predictions are that you're making
And then one more modification to this that sometimes people do is that for convenience
They actually like to normalize by they like to make it an average instead of a sum
and so uh here
Let's just keep some counts as well
So n plus equals one starts at zero and then here
We can have sort of like a normalized log likelihood
If we just normalize it by the count
Then we will sort of get the average log likelihood. So this would be usually our loss function here
Is put this we would this is what we would use
So our loss function for the training set assigned by the model is 2.4
That's the quality of this model
And the lower it is the better off we are and the higher it is the worse off we are
And the job of our you know training is to find the parameters that minimize the negative log likelihood loss
And that would be like a high quality model. Okay, so to summarize I actually wrote it out here
So our goal is to maximize likelihood, which is the product of all the probabilities assigned by the model
And we want to maximize this likelihood with respect to the model parameters
And in our case the model parameters here are defined in the table these numbers the probabilities are
The model parameters is sort of in our brygm language model so far
But you have to keep in mind that here we are storing everything in a table format the probabilities
But what's coming up as a brief preview is that these numbers will not be kept explicitly
But these numbers will be calculated by a neural network
So that's coming up
And we want to change and tune the parameters of these neural networks
We want to change these parameters to maximize the likelihood the product of the probabilities
Now maximizing the likelihood is equivalent to maximizing the log likelihood because log is a monotonic function
Here's the graph of log
And basically all it is doing is it's just scaling your
You can look at it as just a scaling of the loss function
And so the optimization problem here and here are actually equivalent because this is just scaling you can look at it that way
And so these are two identical optimization problems
Um maximizing the log likelihood is equivalent to minimizing the negative log likelihood
And then in practice people actually minimize the average negative log likelihood to get numbers like 2.4
And then this summarizes the quality of your model and we'd like to minimize it and make it as small as possible
And the lowest it can get is zero
and the lower it is
The better off your model is because it's assigning it's assigning high probabilities to your data
Now let's estimate the probability over the entire training set just to make sure that we get something around 2.4
Let's run this over the entire oops
Let's take out the print statement as well
Okay 2.45 or the entire training set
Now what I'd like to show you is that you can actually evaluate the probability for any word that you want like for example
If we just test a single word andre and bring back the print statement
Then you see that andre is actually kind of like an unlikely word or like on average
We take three log probability to represent it and roughly that's because ej apparently is very uncommon as an example
Now think through this
When I take andre and I append q and I test the probability of it andreq
We actually get um infinity
And that's because jq has a zero percent probability according to our model. So the log likelihood
So the log of zero will be negative infinity. We get infinite loss
So this is kind of undesirable right because we plugged in a string that could be like a somewhat reasonable name
But basically what this is saying is that this model is exactly zero percent likely to uh to predict this
Name and our loss is infinity on this example
And really what the reason for that is that j
is followed by q
zero times
Where's q jq is zero and so jq is uh zero percent likely
So it's actually kind of gross and people don't like this too much to fix this
There's a very simple fix that people like to do to sort of like smooth out your model a little bit
It's called model smoothing
And roughly what's happening is that we will eight we will add some fake accounts
So imagine adding a count of one to everything
So we add a count of one
like this
And then we recalculate the probabilities
And that's model smoothing and you can add as much as you like you can add five and that will give you a smoother model
and the more you add here
The more uniform model you're gonna have and the less you add
The more peaked model you are gonna have of course
So one is like a pretty decent
Count to add and that will ensure that there will be no zeros in our probability matrix p
And so this will of course change the generations a little bit in this case. It didn't buy it in principle. It could
But what that's going to do now is that nothing will be infinity
unlikely
So now
Our model will predict some other probability and we see that jq now has a very small probability
So the model still finds it very surprising that this was a word or a by-gram, but we don't get negative infinity
So it's kind of like a nice fix that people like to apply sometimes and it's called model smoothing
Okay, so we've now trained a respectable
by-gram character level language model and we saw that we both
Sort of trained the model by looking at the counts of all the by-grams
And normalizing the rows to get probability distributions
We saw that we can also then use those parameters of this model to perform sampling of new words
So we sample new names according to those distributions
And we also saw that we can evaluate the quality of this model
And the quality of this model is summarized in a single number
Which is the negative log likelihood and the lower this number is the better the model is
Because it is giving high probabilities to the actual next characters and all the by-grams in our training set
So that's all well and good
But we've arrived at this model explicitly by doing something that felt sensible
We were just performing counts and then we were normalizing those counts
Now what I would like to do is I would like to take an alternative approach
We will end up in a very very similar position
But the approach will look very different because I would like to cast the problem of by-gram character level language modeling into the neural network framework
And in neural network framework, we're going to approach things slightly differently, but again end up in a very similar spot
I'll go into that later
Now our neural network is going to be a still a by-gram character level language model
So it receives a single character as an input
Then there's neural network with some weights or some parameters w
And it's going to output the probability distribution over the next character in a sequence
It's going to make guesses as to what is likely to follow this character that was input to the model
And then in addition to that we're going to be able to evaluate any setting of the parameters of the neural net because we have the loss function
The negative log likelihood. So we're going to take a look at its probability distributions and we're going to use the labels
Which are basically just the identity of the next character in that by-gram the second character
So knowing what the second character actually comes next in the by-gram
Allows us to then look at what how high of probability the model assigns to that character
And then we of course want the probability to be very high
And that is another way of saying that the loss is low
So we're going to use gradient based optimization then to tune the parameters of this network
Because we have the loss function and we're going to minimize it
So we're going to tune the weights so that the neural net is correctly predicting the probabilities for the next character
So let's get started. The first thing I want to do is I want to compile the training set of this neural network, right?
So create the training set
of all the by-grams
Okay, and
Here I'm going to copy paste this code
Because this code iterates over all the by-grams
So here we start with the words we iterate over all the by-grams and previously as you recall we did the counts
But now we're not going to do counts. We're just creating a training set
Now this training set will be made up of two lists
We have the
inputs
And the targets the the labels
And these by-grams will denote x y those are the characters, right?
And so we're given the first character of the by-gram and then we're trying to predict the next one
Both of these are going to be integers. So here we'll take x's that append is just
x1 y's that append ix2
And then here
We actually don't want lists of integers. We will create uh tensors out of these. So x's is torched dot tensor
x's and y's is torched dot tensor of y's
And then we don't actually want to take all the words just yet because I want everything to be manageable
So let's just do the first word which is emma
And then it's clear what these x's and y's would be
Here let me print
Character one character two just so you see what's going on here
So the by-grams of these characters is dot e e m m m a dot
So this single word as I mentioned has one two three four five examples for our neural network
There are five separate examples in emma
And those examples are summarized here when the input to the neural neural network is integer zero
The desired label is integer five which corresponds to e
When the input to the neural network is five, we want its weights to be arranged so that 13 gets a very high probability
When 13 is put in we want 13 to have a high probability
When 13 is put in we also want one to have a high probability
When one is input we want zero to have a very high probability
So there are five separate input examples to a neural net
in this data set
I wanted to add a tangent of a note of caution to be careful with a lot of the apis of some of these frameworks
You saw me silently use torch dot tensor with a lowercase t and the output looked right
But you should be aware that there's actually two ways of constructing a tensor
There's a torch dot lowercase tensor and there's also a torch dot capital tensor class, which you can also construct
So you can actually call both you can also do torch dot capital tensor
And you get an x as in y as well
So that's not confusing at all
There are threads on what is the difference between these two and um
Unfortunately, the docs are just like not clear on the difference and when you look at the the docs of lowercase tensor construct tensor
With no autograd history by copying data
It's just like it doesn't
It doesn't make sense. So the actual difference as far as I can tell is explained eventually in this random thread that you can google
And really it comes down to I believe
That um, where is this?
Torch dot tensor in first the d type the data type automatically while torch dot tensor just returns a float tensor
I would recommend stick to torch dot lowercase tensor
so um
Indeed we see that when I construct this with a capital t the data type here of x's is float 32
But torch dot lowercase tensor
You see how it's now x dot d type is now integer
So, um
It's advised that you use lowercase t and you can read more about it if you like in some of these threads
but basically
I'm pointing out some of these things because because I want to caution you and I want you to read get used to reading a
lot of documentation and reading through a lot of uh q and a's and threads like this and um
You know some of this stuff is unfortunately not easy and not very well documented and you have to be careful out there
What we want here is integers because that's what makes sense
um
and so
Lowercase tensor is what we are using. Okay. Now. We want to think through how we're going to feed in these examples into a neural network
Now it's not quite as straightforward as
Plugging it in because these examples right now are integers. So there's like a 0 5 or 13
It gives us the index of the character and you can't just plug an integer index into a neural net
these neural nets, uh, right are sort of made up of these neurons and uh, these neurons have weights
And as you saw in micrograd these weights act multiplicatively on the inputs w x plus b
There's 10 hs and so on and so it doesn't really make sense to make an input neuron
Take on integer values that you feed in and then multiply on with weights
So instead a common way of encoding integers is what's called one hot encoding
In one hot encoding, uh, we take an integer like 13 and we create a vector that is all zeros
Except for the 13th dimension which we turn to a one and then that vector can feed into a neural net
Now conveniently, uh, PyTorch actually has something called the one hot
Function inside torch and in functional it takes a tensor made up of integers
Long is a is a is an integer
And it also takes a number of classes, um, which is how large you want your tensor your vector to be
So here let's import torch dot and in that functional sf. This is a common way of importing it
And then let's do f dot one hot
And we feed in the integers that we want to encode
So we can actually feed in the entire array of x's
And we can tell it that num classes is 27
So it doesn't have to try to guess it it may have guessed that it's only 13 and would give us an incorrect result
So this is the one hot. Let's call this x ink for x encoded
And then we see that x encoded that shape is 5 by 27
and uh
We can also visualize it plt.im show of x ink
To make it a little bit more clear because this is a little messy
So we see that we've encoded all the five examples
Into vectors we have five examples
So we have five rows and each row here is now an example into a neural net
And we see that the appropriate bit is turned on as a one and everything else is zero
so um
Here for example, the zero bit is turned on the fifth bit is turned on
Thirteenth bits are turned on for both of these examples and the first bit here is turned on
So that's how we can encode
integers into vectors
And then these vectors can feed in to neural nets one more issue to be careful with here by the way is
Let's look at the data type of encoding. We always want to be careful with data types
What would you expect x encodings data type to be when we're plugging numbers into neural nets?
We don't want them to be integers. We want them to be floating point numbers that can take on various values
But the d type here is actually 64 bit integer
And the reason for that I suspect is that one hot received a 64 bit integer here
And it returned the same data type
And when you look at the signature of one hot it doesn't even take a d type a desired data type of the output tensor
And so we can't in a lot of functions in torch we'd be able to do something like d type equals torch dot float 32
Which is what we want, but one hot does not support that
So instead we're going to want to cast this to float like this
So that these
Everything is the same
Everything looks the same but the d type is float 32 and floats can feed into
Neural nets. So now let's construct our first neuron
This neuron will look at these input vectors
And as you remember from micrograd these neurons basically perform a very simple function wx plus b where wx is a dot product
right
So we can achieve the same thing here. Let's first define the weights of this neuron
Basically, what are the initial weights at initialization for this neuron?
Let's initialize them with torch dot random
torch dot random
is
Fills a tensor with random numbers
drawn from a normal distribution
And a normal distribution has
A probability density function like this and so most of the numbers drawn from this distribution will be around zero
But some of them will be as high as almost three and so on and very few numbers will be above three in magnitude
So we need to take a size as an input here
And i'm going to use size as to be 27 by one
So 27 by one and then let's visualize w. So w is a column vector of 27 numbers
And uh, these weights are then multiplied by the inputs
So now to perform this multiplication, we can take x encoding and we can multiply it with w
This is a matrix multiplication operator in pytorch
And the output of this operation is five by one
The reason it's five by five is the following
We took x encoding, which is five by 27 and we multiplied it by 27 by one
And in matrix multiplication
You see that the output will become five by one because these 27 will multiply and add
So basically what we're seeing here out of this operation
Is we are seeing the five
um
activations
of this neuron
On these five inputs and we've evaluated all of them in parallel
We didn't feed in just a single input to the single neuron
We fed in simultaneously all the five inputs into the same neuron
And in parallel pytorch has evaluated
The wx plus b but here is just wx. There's no bias
It has valued w w times x for all of them
Uh independently now instead of a single neuron though, I would like to have 27 neurons and I'll show you in the second
Why I'm on 27 neurons?
So instead of having just a one here, which is indicating this presence of one single neuron
We can use 27
And then when w is 27 by 27
This will in parallel evaluate all the 27 neurons on all the five inputs
Giving us a much better much much bigger result
So now what we've done is five by 27 multiplied 27 by 27
And the output of this is now five by 27
So we can see that the shape of this
Is five by 27
So what is every element here telling us right?
It's telling us for every one of 27 neurons that we created
What is the firing rate of those neurons on every one of those five examples
so
The element for example 3 comma 13
Is giving us the firing rate of the 13th neuron
looking at the third input
And the way this was achieved is by a dot product
between the third input
and the 13th column
of this w matrix here
Okay, so using matrix multiplication. We can very efficiently evaluate
The dot product between lots of input examples in a batch
And lots of neurons where all of those neurons have weights in the columns of those w's
And in matrix multiplication, we're just doing those dot products and
In parallel just to show you that this is the case. We can take x-ank and we can take the third
row
And we can take the w and take its 13th column
And then we can do x-ank at 3
Element wise multiply with w at 13
And sum that up does w x plus b
Well, there's no plus b. It's just w x dot product. And that's
this number
So you see that this is just being done efficiently by the matrix multiplication
operation for all the input examples and for all the output neurons of this first layer
Okay, so we fed our 27 dimensional inputs into a first layer of a neural net that has 27 neurons, right?
So we have 27 inputs and now we have 27 neurons these neurons perform w times x
They don't have a bias and they don't have a non-linearity like 10 h
We're going to leave them to be a linear layer
In addition to that we're not going to have any other layers. This is going to be it. It's just going to be
The dumbest smallest simplest neural net, which is just a single linear layer
And now I'd like to explain what I want those 27 outputs to be
Intuitively what we're trying to produce here for every single input example
Is we're trying to produce some kind of a probability distribution for the next character in a sequence
And there's 27 of them
But we have to come up with like precise semantics for exactly how we're going to interpret
These 27 numbers that these neurons take on
Now intuitively
You see here that these numbers are negative and some of them are positive, etc
And that's because these are coming out of a neural net layer initialized with these
normal distribution
parameters
But what we want is we want something like we had here
Like each row here told us the counts and then we normalize the counts to get probabilities
And we want something similar to come out of a neural net
But what we just have right now is just some negative and positive numbers
Now we want those numbers to somehow represent the probabilities for the next character
But you see that probabilities they they have a special structure. They um
They're positive numbers and they sum to 1 and so that doesn't just come out of a neural net
And then they can't be counts because these counts are positive
And counts are integers. So counts are also not really a good thing to output from a neural net
So instead what the neural net is going to output and how we are going to interpret the um
The 27 numbers is that these 27 numbers are giving us log counts
basically
um
So instead of giving us counts directly like in this table, they're giving us log counts
And to get the counts, we're going to take the log counts and we're going to exponentiate them
now
exponentiation
takes the following form
It takes numbers
That are negative or they are positive. It takes the entire real line
And then if you plug in negative numbers, you're going to get e to the x which is
always below 1
So you're getting numbers lower than 1
And if you plug in numbers greater than zero, you're getting numbers greater than one
all the way growing to the infinity
And this here grows to zero
So basically we're going to take these numbers
here
and
Instead of them being positive and negative and all over the place
We're going to interpret them as log counts and then we're going to element wise exponentiate these numbers
Exponentiating them now gives us something like this
And you see that these numbers now because they went through an exponent
All the negative numbers turned into numbers below one like 0.338
And all the positive numbers originally turned into even more positive numbers sort of greater than one
um, so like for example
Is some positive number over here?
That is greater than zero
But
Exponentiated outputs here
Basically give us something that we can use and interpret as the equivalent of counts originally
So you see these counts here 112 7 51 1 etc
The neural net is kind of now predicting
Uh
counts
And these counts are positive numbers. They can never be below zero. So that makes sense
And they can now take on various values
Depending on the settings of w
So let me break this down
We're going to interpret these to be the log counts
In other words for this that is often used is so called logits
These are logits log counts
Then these will be sort of the counts
Logits exponentiated
And this is equivalent to the n matrix sort of the n
Array that we used previously. Remember, this was the n
This is the the array of counts and each row here are the counts for the
For the um next character sort of
So those are the counts and now the probabilities are just the counts
um normalized
and so um
I'm not going to find the same but basically I'm not going to scroll all over the place
We've already done this. We want two counts that sum
Along the first dimension and we want to keep them. It's true
We've went over this and this is how we normalized the rows of our counts matrix to get our probabilities
Props
So now these are the probabilities
And these are the counts that we have currently and now when I show the probabilities
You see that um every row here, of course
Will sum to one
Because they're normalized
And the shape of this
Is five by 27
And so really what we've achieved is for every one of our five examples
We now have a row that came out of a neural net
And because of the transformations here, we made sure that this output of this neural net now
Are probabilities or we can interpret to be probabilities
so
Our wx here gave us logits and then we interpret those to be log counts
We exponentiate to get something that looks like counts
And then we normalize those counts to get a probability distribution
And all of these are differentiable operations
So what we've done now is we are taking inputs
We have differentiable operations that we can back propagate through
And we're getting out probability distributions
So um for example for the zeroth example that fed in
Right, which was um
The zeroth example here was a one half vector of zero
and um
It basically corresponded to feeding in
Uh
This example here
So we're feeding in a dot into a neural net and the way we fed the dot into a neural net is that we first got its index
Then we one hot encoded it
Then it went into the neural net and out came
This distribution of probabilities
And its shape
Is 27 there's 27 numbers and we're going to interpret this as the neural net's assignment for how likely
every one of these characters
The 27 characters are to come next
And as we tune the weights w
We're going to be of course getting different probabilities out for any character that you input
And so now the question is just can we optimize and find a good w?
Such that the probabilities coming out are pretty good
And the way we measure pretty good is by the loss function
Okay, so I organized everything into a single summary so that hopefully it's a bit more clear
So it starts here with an input data set
We have some inputs to the neural net and we have some labels for the correct next character in a sequence and these are integers
Here i'm using uh torch generators now so that you see the same numbers that I see
and i'm generating um
27 neurons weights and each neuron here receives 27 inputs
Then here we're going to plug in all the input examples x's into a neural net. So here this is a forward pass
First we have to encode all of the inputs into one half representations
So we have 27 classes. We pass in these integers and x ink becomes a array that is 5 by 27
zeros except for a few ones
We then multiply this in the first layer of a neural net to get logits
Exponentiate the logits to get fake counts sort of and normalize these counts to get probabilities
So the these last two lines by the way here are called the softmax
Uh, which I pulled up here
Softmax is a very often used layer in a neural net that takes these z's which are logits
Exponentiates them
And uh divides and normalizes it's a way of taking
outputs of a neural net layer and these
These outputs can be positive or negative
And it outputs probability distributions. It outputs something that is always
sums to one and are positive numbers just like probabilities
Um, so this is kind of like a normalization function if you want to think of it that way
And you can put it on top of any other linear layer inside a neural net
And it basically makes a neural net output probabilities. That's very often used and we used it as well here
So this is the forward pass and that's how we made a neural net output probability
now
you'll notice that um
All of these this entire forward pass is made up of differentiable
Layers everything here we can back propagate through and we saw some of the back propagation in micrograd
This is just
Multiplication and addition all that's happening here
Just multiply and then add and we know how to back propagate through them
Exponentiations we know how to back propagate through
And then here we are summing and sum is is easily back propagated well as well
And division as well. So everything here is differentiable operation
And we can back propagate through
Now we achieve these probabilities which are 5 by 27
For every single example, we have a vector of probabilities that sum to 1
And then here I wrote a bunch of stuff to sort of like break down
The examples so we have five examples making up emma, right?
And there are five bigrams inside emma
So by gram example a by gram example one is that e is the beginning character right after dot
And the indexes for these are zero and five. So then we feed in a zero
That's the input to the neural net we get probabilities from the neural net that are 27 numbers
And then the label is five because e actually comes after dot. So that's the label
And then
We use this label five to index into the probability distribution here
So this index five here is zero one two three four five. It's this number here
Which is here
So that's basically the probability assigned by the neural net to the actual correct character
You see that the network currently thinks that this next character that e following dot is only 1% likely
Which is of course not very good, right?
Because this actually is a training example and the network thinks that this is currently very very unlikely
But that's just because we didn't get very lucky in generating a good setting of w
So right now this network thinks this is unlikely and 0.01 is not a good outcome
So the log likelihood then
Is very negative and the negative log likelihood is very positive
And so four is a very high
negative log likelihood
And that means we're going to have a high loss
Because what is the loss the loss is just the average negative log likelihood
So the second character is em
And you see here that also the network thought that m following e is very unlikely 1%
The for m following m it thought it was 2%
And for a following m it actually thought it was 7% likely
So just by chance this one actually has a pretty good probability and therefore a pretty low negative log likelihood
And finally here it thought this was 1% likely
So overall our average negative log likelihood, which is the loss the total loss that summarizes
Basically the how well this network currently works at least on this one word not on the full data
So just the one word is 3.76 which is actually very fairly high loss. This is not a very good setting of w's
Now here's what we can do
We're currently getting 3.76
We can actually come here and we can change our w we can resample it
So let me just add one to have a different seed
And then we get a different w and then we can rerun this
And with this different seed with this different setting of w's we now get 3.37
So this is a much better w right and that and it's better because the probabilities just happen to come out
Higher for the for the characters that actually are next
And so you can imagine actually just resampling this, you know, we can try as two
So
Okay, this was not very good. Let's try one more. We can try three
Okay, this was terrible setting because we have a very high loss
so
Anyway, I'm going to erase this
What I'm doing here, which is just guess and check of randomly assigning parameters and seeing if the network is good
That is a amateur hour. That's not how you optimize a neural net
The way you optimize your neural net is you start with some random guess and we're going to commit to this one
Even though it's not very good
But now the big deal is we have a loss function
So this loss
Is made up only of differentiable
operations
And we can minimize the loss by tuning
W's by computing the gradients of the loss with respect to these w matrices
And so then we can tune w to minimize the loss and find a good setting of w using gradient based optimization
So let's see how that will work now things are actually going to look almost identical to what we had with micrograd
So here I pulled up the lecture from micrograd the notebook
It's from this repository
And when I scroll all the way to the end where we left off with micrograd, we had something very very similar
We had a number of input examples in this case. We had four input examples inside x's
And we had their targets
desired targets
Just like here we have our x's now, but we have five of them and they're now integers instead of vectors
But we're going to convert our integers to vectors except our vectors will be 27 large instead of three large
And then here what we did is first we did a forward pass where we ran a neural net on all of the inputs
to get predictions
Our neural net at the time this n of x was a multilayer perceptron
Our neural net is going to look different because our neural net is just a single layer
Single linear layer followed by a softmax
So that's our neural net
And the loss here was the mean squared error
So we simply subtracted the prediction from the ground truth and squared it and summed it all up
And that was the loss and loss was the single number that summarized the quality of the neural net
And when loss is low like almost zero that means the neural net is um predicting correctly
So we had a single number that uh that summarized the uh the performance of the neural net
And everything here was differentiable and was stored in massive compute graph
And then we iterated over all the parameters
We made sure that the gradients are set to zero and we called loss.backward
And loss.backward initiated back propagation at the final output node of loss, right? So
Yeah, I remember these expressions. We had loss all the way at the end
We start back propagation and we went all the way back
And we made sure that we populated all the parameters dot grad
So dot grad started at zero but back propagation filled it in
And then in the update we iterated over all the parameters and we simply did a parameter update where every single
element of our parameters was nudged in the opposite direction of the gradient
And so we're going to do the exact same thing here
So i'm going to pull this up
On the side here
So that we have it available and we're actually going to do the exact same thing
So this was the forward pass. So we're we did this
And probes is our y-pred
So now we have to evaluate the loss, but we're not using the mean squared error
We're using the negative log likelihood because we are doing classification. We're not doing regression as it's called
So here we want to calculate loss
Now the way we calculate it is is just this average negative log likelihood
Now this probes here
Has a shape of five by 27
And so to get all the we basically want to pluck out the probabilities at the correct indices here
So in particular because the labels are stored here in the array y's
Basically what we're after is for the first example, we're looking at probability of five right at index five
for the second example
at the the second row or row index one
We are interested in the probability assigned to index 13
At the second example, we also have 13
At the third row, we want one
And at the last row, which is four we want zero
So these are the probabilities we're interested in right and you can see that they're not amazing as we saw above
So these are the probabilities we want but we want like a more efficient way to access these probabilities
Um, not just listing them out in a tuple like this
So it turns out that the way to do this in pi torch one of the ways at least is we can basically pass in all of these
Sorry about that all of these um integers in vectors
So the these ones you see how they're just zero one two three four
We can actually create that using mp not mp. Sorry torch dot a range of five
zero one two three four
So we can index here with torch dot a range of five
And here we index with y's
And you see that that gives us
exactly these numbers
So that plugs out the probabilities of that the neural network assigns to the
correct next character
Now we take those probabilities and we don't we actually look at the log probability
So we want to dot log
And then we want to just average that up
So take the mean of all of that and then it's the negative average log likelihood. That is the loss
So the loss here is
3.7 something and you see that this loss 3.76
3.76 is exactly as we've obtained before but this is a vectorized form of that expression
So we get the same loss
And the same loss we can consider sort of as part of this forward pass
And we've achieved here now loss
Okay, so we made our way all the way to loss. We've defined the forward pass
We forwarded the network and the loss now. We're ready to do the backward pass. So backward pass
We want to first make sure that all the gradients are reset. So they're at zero
Now in pi torch, you can set the gradients to be zero
But you can also just set it to none and setting it to none is more efficient
And pi torch will interpret none as like a lack of a gradient and it's the same as zeros
So this is a way to set to zero the gradient
And now we do lost up backward
Before we do lost up backward, we need one more thing if you remember from micrograd
pi torch actually requires
That we pass in requires grad is true
Uh, so that we tell
Pi torch that we are interested in calculating gradients for this leaf tensor by default. This is false
So let me recalculate with that
And then set to none and lost up backward
Now something magical happened when lost up backward was run
Because pi torch just like micrograd when we did the forward pass here
It keeps track of all the operations under the hood. It builds a full computational graph
Just like the graphs we've produced in micrograd those graphs exist inside pi torch
And so it knows all the dependencies and all the mathematical operations of everything
And when you then calculate the loss we can call a dot backward on it
And dot backward then fills in the gradients of
All the intermediates all the way back to w's
Which are the parameters of our neural net. So now we can do w dot grad
And we see that it has structure there's stuff inside it
And these gradients every single element here
So w dot shape is 27 by 27
W grads shape is the same 27 by 27
And every element of w dot grad
is telling us
The influence of that weight on the loss function
So for example this number all the way here
If this element the zero zero element of w
Because the gradient is positive it's telling us that this has a positive influence on the loss slightly nudging
w
slightly taking w zero zero
And adding a small h to it
Would increase the loss mildly because this gradient is positive
Some of these gradients are also negative
So that's telling us about the gradient information and we can use this gradient information
To update the weights of this neural network. So let's not do the update
It's going to be very similar to what we had in micrograd
We need no loop over all the parameters because we only have one parameter
Tensor and that is w. So we simply do w dot data plus equals
The we can actually copy this almost exactly negative zero point one times
w dot grad
um
And that would be the update to the tensor
So that updates the tensor
And because the tensor is updated we would expect that now the loss should decrease
So here if I print loss
That item
It was 3.76 right
So we've updated the w here. So if I recalculate forward pass
Loss now should be slightly lower. So 3.76 goes to
3.74
And then we can again set to set grad to none and backward
update
And now the parameters changed again
So if we recalculate the forward pass, we expect a lower loss again 3.72
Okay, and this is again doing the we're now doing reading the set
And when we achieve a low loss that will mean that the network is assigning high probabilities to the correct next characters
Okay, so I rearranged everything and I put it all together from scratch
So here is where we construct our data set of bigrams
You see that we are still iterating only over the first word emma
I'm going to change that in a second
I added a number that counts the number of elements in axis so that we explicitly see that number of examples is five
Because currently we're just working with emma. There's five bigrams there
And here I added a loop of exactly what we had before
So we had 10 iterations of gradient descent of forward pass backward pass and an update
And so running these two cells initialization and gradient descent
Gives us some improvement
on the last function
But now I want to use all the words
And there's not five but 228,000 bigrams now
However, this should require no modification whatsoever. Everything should just run
Because all the code we wrote doesn't care if there's five bigrams or 228,000 bigrams and with everything we should just work
So
You see that this will just run
But now we are optimizing over the entire training set of all the bigrams
And you see now that we are decreasing very slightly. So actually we can probably afford the larger learning rate
Can probably afford even larger learning rate
Even 50 seems to work on this very very simple example, right? So let me re-initialize and let's run 100 iterations
See what happens
Okay
We seem to be
Coming up to some pretty good losses here 2.47
Let me run 100 more
What is the number that we expect by the way in the loss?
We expect to get something around what we had originally actually
So all the way back if you remember in the beginning of this video when we
optimized
Just by counting
Our loss was roughly 2.47
After we added smoothing
But before smoothing we had roughly 2.45
likely it
Sorry loss
And so that's actually roughly the vicinity of what we expect to achieve
But before we achieved it by counting and here we are achieving the roughly the same result
But with gradient based optimization
So we come to about 2.46 2.45, etc
And that makes sense because fundamentally we're not taking any additional information
We're still just taking in the previous character and trying to predict the next one
But instead of doing it explicitly by counting and normalizing
We are doing it with gradient based learning and it just so happens that the explicit approach
Happens to very well optimize the loss function without any need for gradient based optimization
Because the setup for bi-gram language models are is so straightforward. It's so simple
We can just afford to estimate those probabilities directly and maintain them in a table
But the gradient based approach is significantly more flexible
so we've actually gained a lot because
What we can do now is
We can expand this approach and complexify the neural net
So currently we're just taking a single character and feeding into a neural net and the neural is extremely simple
But we're about to iterate on this substantially
We're going to be taking multiple previous characters and we're going to be feeding them into increasingly more complex neural nets
But fundamentally out the output of the neural net will always just be logits
And those logits will go through the exact same transformation
We're going to take them through a softmax
Calculate the loss function and the negative log likelihood and do gradient based optimization
And so actually as we complexify the neural nets and work all the way up to transformers
None of this will really fundamentally change
None of this will fundamentally change the only thing that will change is
The way we do the forward pass or we've taken some previous characters and calculate logits for the next character in a sequence
that will become more complex
And that will use the same machinery to optimize it
and
It's not obvious how we would have extended
This bygram approach
Into the case where there are many more
Characters at the input because eventually these tables would get way too large because there's way too many combinations
Of what previous characters
could be
If you only have one previous character we can just keep everything in a table the counts
But if you have the last 10 characters that are in but we can't actually keep everything in the table anymore
So this is fundamentally an unscalable approach and the neural network approach is significantly more scalable
And it's something that actually we can improve on over time. So that's where we will be digging next
I wanted to point out two more things
number one
I want you to notice that this
x-ank here
This is made up of one-hot vectors and then those one-hot vectors are multiplied by this w matrix
And we think of this as a multiple neurons being forwarded in a fully connected manner
But actually what's happening here is that for example
If you have a one-hot vector here that has a one at say the fifth dimension
Then because of the way the matrix multiplication works
Multiplying that one-hot vector with w actually ends up plucking out the fifth row of w
Lot logits would become just the fifth row of w
And that's because of the way the matrix multiplication works
So that's actually what ends up happening
So but that's actually exactly what happened before because remember all the way up here
We have a bi-gram
We took the first character and then that first character indexed into a row of this array here
And that row gave us the probability distribution for the next character
So the first character was used as a lookup into a
Matrix here to get the probability distribution
Well, that's actually exactly what's happening here because we're taking the index
We're encoding it as one-hot and multiplying it by w
So logits literally becomes the
The appropriate row of w and that gets just as before
Exponentiated to create the counts and then normalized and becomes probability
So this w here is literally
The same as this array here
But w remember is the log counts not the counts. So it's more precise to say that w
Exponentiated w.exp is this array
But this array was filled in by counting
and by basically
Populating the counts of bi-grams whereas in the gradient based framework
We initialize it randomly and then we let the loss
Guide us to arrive at the exact same array
So this array exactly here
is
Basically the array w at the end of optimization except we arrived at it
piece by piece by following the loss
And that's why we also obtained the same loss function at the end and the second note is if I come here
remember the smoothing where we added fake counts to our counts in order to
Smooth out and make more uniform the distributions of these probabilities
And that prevented us from assigning zero probability to
Um to any one bi-gram
Now if I increase the count here
What's happening to the probability?
As I increase the count probability becomes more and more uniform
Right because these counts go only up to like 900 or whatever
So if I'm adding plus a million to every single number here
You can see how uh the row and its probability then when we divide
Is just going to become more and more close to exactly even probability uniform distribution
It turns out that the gradient based framework has an equivalent to smoothing
In particular
Think through these w's here
Which we initialized randomly
We could also think about initializing w's to be zero
If all the entries of w are zero
Then you'll see that logits will become all zero
And then exponentiating those logits becomes all one
And then the probabilities turn out to be exactly uniform
So basically when w's are all equal to each other or say especially zero
Then the probabilities come out completely uniform
So
Trying to incentivize w to be near zero
Is basically equivalent
To label smoothing and the more you incentivize that in a loss function the more smooth distribution you're going to achieve
So this brings us to something that's called regularization
Where we can actually augment the loss function to have a small component that we call a regularization loss
In particular what we're going to do is we can take w and we can for example square all of its entries
And then we can um oops
Sorry about that
We can take all the entries of w and we can sum them
And because we're squaring uh, there will be no signs anymore
Um
negatives and positives all get squashed to be positive numbers
And then the way this works is you achieve zero loss if w is exactly or zero
But if w has non-zero numbers you accumulate loss
And so we can actually take this and we can add it on here
So we can do something like loss plus
w square
dot sum
Or let's actually instead of some let's take a mean because otherwise the sum gets too large
So mean is like a little bit more manageable
And then we have a regularization loss here like say 0.01 times or something like that you can choose the regularization strength
And then we can just optimize this
And now this optimization actually has two components not only is it trying to make all the probabilities work out
But in addition to that there's an additional component that simultaneously tries to make all w's be zero
Because if w's are non-zero you feel a loss and so minimizing this the only way to achieve that is for w to be zero
And so you can think of this as adding like a spring force or like a gravity force that that pushes w to be zero
So w wants to be zero and the probabilities want to be uniform
But they also simultaneously want to match up your your probabilities as indicated by the data
And so the strength of this regularization
is exactly controlling
the amount of counts
that you add here
Adding a lot more counts
here
corresponds to
Increasing this number
Because the more you increase it the more this part of the loss function dominates this part
And the more these these weights will be unable to grow because as they grow
They accumulate way too much loss
And so if this is strong enough
Then we are not able to overcome the force of this loss and we will never
And basically everything will be uniform predictions
So I thought that's kind of cool. Okay, and lastly before we wrap up
I wanted to show you how you would sample from this neural net model
And I copy pasted the sampling code from before
Where remember that we sampled five times
And all we did is we started zero we grabbed the current ix row of p
And that was our probability row
From which we sampled the next index and just accumulated that and break when zero
And running this gave us these results
I still have the p in memory. So this is fine now
The speed doesn't come from the row of p instead. It comes from this neural net
First we take ix
And we encode it into a one-hot row
of xank
This xank multiplies our w
Which really just plugs out the row of w corresponding to ix really that's what's happening
And that gets our logits and then we normalize those logits
Exponentiate to get counts and then normalize to get the distribution and then we can sample from the distribution
So if I run this
Kind of anti-climatic or climatic depending how you look at it, but we get the exact same result
Um
And that's because this is in the identical model. Not only does it achieve the same loss
but
As I mentioned, these are identical models and this w is the log counts of what we've estimated before
But we came to this answer in a very different way and it's got a very different interpretation
But fundamentally, this is basically the same model and gives the same samples here. And so
That's kind of cool. Okay, so we've actually covered a lot of ground
We introduced the bi-gram character level language model
We saw how we can train the model how we can sample from the model and how we can evaluate the quality of the model
Using the negative log likelihood loss
And then we actually trained the model in two completely different ways that actually get the same result and the same model
In the first way, we just counted up the frequency of all the bi-grams and normalized
In the second way, we used the uh negative log likelihood loss as a guide
To optimizing the counts matrix
Or the counts array so that the loss is minimized in the in a gradient based framework
and we saw that both of them give the same result
and
That's it
Now the second one of these the gradient based framework is much more flexible
And right now our neural network is super simple
We're taking a single previous character and we're taking it through a single linear layer to calculate the logits
This is about to complexify. So in the follow-up videos, we're going to be taking more and more of these characters
And we're going to be feeding them into a neural net
But this neural net will still output the exact same thing. The neural net will output logits
And these logits will still be normalized in the exact same way and all the loss and everything else and the gradient
Gradient based framework everything stays identical. It's just that this neural net will now
Complexify all the way to transformers
So that's going to be pretty awesome and i'm looking forward to it for now. Bye